add and document `vsc-venv` tool for creating Python virtual environments (#670)
hpcugent/vsc_user_docs: scripts/vsc-venv-wrapper/README.md

# Python Virtual Environment Wrapper Script

`vsc-venv` is a script that encapsulates the creation and management of Python virtual environments. 
This avoids multiple issues with the default `venv` command on the HPC. 

One issue is that a virtual environment created for one cluster might not work on another. 
Additionally, when activating a virtual environment, 
the same centrally installed modules used during its creation must also be loaded.
the `vsc-venv` command manages multiple virtual environments for different clusters in a transparent way, 
while guaranteeing the same module environment.

## Usage

A virtual environment can be activated by running the following command:

```bash
source ./vsc-venv.sh activate <requirements> [module_script]
```

Here, `requirements` is the path to a file containing the python dependencies to install in the virtual environment.

> An optional module script can be provided to load the required modules before creating the virtual environment.

Reviewer: i don't get the optional part. if it is missing, the system python is being used, no?

Reviewer 2: Yes, and perhaps that should come with a warning.

There are use cases where using system Python is OK. EasyBuild for example, or ReFrame.

Reviewer: if the venv does not exist, it should be mandatory and stored after venv creation

if the venv exists, it should be optional. if is not provided, reuse the one that was used during creation. if it is provided and different from original one, hmmm. a bit tricky; but you could overwrite the original one?

so for system python you can use an empty file or eg pass the 'SYSTEM' magic constant (but i would just do empty file)

Author: Fixed in [warning when system python is used + logging of python version](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/pull/670/commits/3b924f433e971bde5ca1ebf458e55b9ecb08ccc2)

Automatically, the modules are loaded and the environment is activated. 
When running this command for the first time, the dependencies from the requirement file are installed.

Now, the software can be run and use packages installed in the virtual environment, along with centrally installed modules.
To deactivate the virtual environment, run:

```bash
source ./vsc-venv.sh deactivate
```

## Example

Suppose we are on the login node, and we want to make a virtual environment for doduo, which is loaded by default.

> The following files are present in the current directory:

Reviewer: mandatory?

**modules.sh:**
```bash

> ml Python/3.12.3-GCCcore-13.3.0

Reviewer: this is any bash code?

Reviewer 2: Hmm, maybe it's better to have a `modules.txt`, and then we load the modules one by one ourselves?

That also makes error checking easier.

Author: Done in [5f05699](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/pull/670/commits/5f05699138ff64e6fe2e79e5cf107826c3a0665c)

```

> and **requirements.txt:**

Reviewer: add a ref to the supported syntax (eg version locks/limits)

Author: Added in [requirements.txt docs referene added](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/pull/670/commits/210cb01434b465a6ec2b261294d44d896ea4e4b7)

```bash
requests
```

We run the following commands to enter the environment

```bash
source ./vsc-venv.sh activate requirements.txt modules.sh
```

> As this creates the virtual environment for the first time, the `venvs` folder is created. 

Reviewer: created in the current dir?

Author: Clarified in [docs: venvs folder created in current directory](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/pull/670/commits/bd59341d41112ae206e375867532e2256a30b2ec)

> Within this folder, a new folder is created for the virtual environment `venv-RHEL8-zen2`.

Reviewer: it's a first step, but doesn't protect against incompatible toolchains

Reviewer 2: If the exit code is checked for the `source modules.sh` call, then that's sufficient?

Anything beyond that it outside of scope for this helper script imho

Now, python 3.12 is loaded and the user can use the `requests` package.

To deactivate the virtual environment, run:

```bash
source ./vsc-venv.sh deactivate
```

### joltik

If we want to create a virtual environment for joltik, we can run the following commands:

```bash
module swap cluster/joltik
qsub -I

> source ./vsc-venv.sh activate requirements.txt modules.sh

Reviewer: maybe add the `cd ...` to set the proper path?

Author: Added in [docs: add 'cd my_project'](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/pull/670/commits/bbc70d130f331b672fba6ad35911a81d439db9c5)

# Python Virtual Environment Wrapper Script

`vsc-venv` is a script that encapsulates the creation and management of Python virtual environments. 
This avoids multiple issues with the default `venv` command on the HPC. 

One issue is that a virtual environment created for one cluster might not work on another. 
Additionally, when activating a virtual environment, 
the same centrally installed modules used during its creation must also be loaded.
the `vsc-venv` command manages multiple virtual environments for different clusters in a transparent way, 
while guaranteeing the same module environment.

## Usage

A virtual environment can be activated by running the following command:

```bash

> source ./vsc-venv.sh --activate --requirements <requirements> [--modules module_file]

Reviewer 2: Change all occurrences of `./vsc-venv.sh` to `module load vsc-env`, and just using `source vsc-venv` (no `./`).

We'll install the `vsc-env` module with versioning.

Author: Done in [use 'module load vsc-env'](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/pull/670/commits/66e03c36b62b6c48335af3322ee07ad89c848855), except when deactivate is called, as the module is already loaded at that time

Author: forgot to [remove .sh](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/pull/670/commits/241c3dc0698912404434e90a4294cb45d3ac83b7)

Author: is it right that the module is not called `vsc-venv` but `vsc-env`?

```

Here, `requirements` is the path to a file containing the python dependencies to install in the virtual environment.
An optional `module_file` can be provided, which lists the modules to load before activating the virtual environment.

Automatically, the modules are loaded and the environment is activated. 

> When running this command for the first time, the dependencies from the requirement file are installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When running this command for the first time, the dependencies from the requirements file are installed.

> Now, the software can be run and use packages installed in the virtual environment, along with centrally installed modules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, the software can be run and Python packages installed in the virtual environment can be used, along with software provided via centrally installed modules.

You can get insights on the current environment using the following commands:
```
python --version    # Python version
pip list            # List of installed Python packages
module list         # List of loaded modules
```

To deactivate the virtual environment, run:

```bash
source ./vsc-venv.sh --deactivate
```

## Example

> Suppose we are on the login node, and we want to make a virtual environment for doduo, which is loaded by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose we are on the HPC-UGent Tier-2 login nodes, and we want to make a virtual environment for doduo, the default cluster.
```

The following files are present in the current directory:

**modules.txt:**
```bash
Python/3.12.3-GCCcore-13.3.0
SciPy-bundle/2024.05-gfbf-2024a
```

and **requirements.txt:**
```
requests
```

For more info on the `requirements.txt` file, 
see the [pip documentation](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/requirements-file-format/).

We run the following commands to enter the environment

```bash
source ./vsc-venv.sh --activate --requirements requirements.txt --modules modules.txt
```

> As this creates the virtual environment for the first time, the `venvs` folder is created in the current directory. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As this creates the virtual environment for the first time, a `venvs` subdirectory is created in the current directory.

> Within this folder, a new folder is created for the virtual environment `venv-RHEL8-zen2`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within `venvs/`, an additional subdirectory is created for the virtual environment: `venv-RHEL8-zen2`.
```

> Now, python 3.12 is loaded and the user can use the `requests` package, along with the packages from the SciPy bundle.

Reviewer 2: Unclear where `requests` comes from, just use `numpy` provided by `SciPy-bundle` module as example:
```suggestion
Now, Python 3.12 is loaded and both the `numpy` (provided by the `SciPy-bundle` module) and `requests` Python packages can be used.

To deactivate the virtual environment, run:

```bash
source ./vsc-venv.sh --deactivate
```

### joltik

> If we want to create a virtual environment for joltik, we can run the following commands:

Reviewer 2: Don't use `joltik` as example (it's old, and a GPU cluster), use `donphan` instead:
```suggestion
If we want to create a virtual environment for another cluster, say donphan, we can use `vsc-venv` in an interactive job:
```

```bash

> module swap cluster/joltik

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
module swap cluster/donphan

> the `vsc-venv` command manages multiple virtual environments for different clusters in a transparent way, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `vsc-venv` command manages multiple virtual environments for different clusters in a transparent way,
